[00]Introduction
The topic of this paper is Innovative methods by NGOs and scaling. This paper analyses some of the methods followed by NGOs to address issues that the government failing to address. Some of these methods are small scale models; this paper tries to explain difficulties in scaling these models at a higher level. Case studies were conducted on some major NGOs working on large scale and some NGOs working in small scale but producing good results. The observations made are on these case studies.
They key questions asked in this research are:
·	What is the need for the NGOs?
·	Who are the major beneficiaries of the educational NGOs?
·	What are the ways in which NGOs are working on these issues?
·	Can those methods be scaled up?

Need for the NGOs: 
In India government is trying to achieve 100 % literacy from the past 60 years, but we are still in the range of 74% [1] which is below the world’s average literacy rate (84%). Literacy rate does not give the full picture of India’s education system. The enrolment rate, retention rate, dropout rate are the other indices that show progress in quality of education and students overall improvement. Even though enrolment rate is 96% [1] Dropout rates are still in the range of 30% [1]. Government’s new policies & acts like SSA are providing government some success in terms of enrolment and dropout rates. But these programs may not be able to provide quality education unless they take in to account the new improvements in technology and need for alternative education methodologies. 
          NGOs are essential to point out failures of the government either directly or through their work. Some NGOs work on the sole purpose of proving some value to their beneficiary, where as some work to make the beneficiary what they can expect from the government. NGOs in education are contributing to improve quality of education. Some NGOs are working along with the government to implement their ideologies. Some NGOs are working through partnerships along with other NGOs. Partnership of government bodies with NGOs might increase the accountability of the government body. There are instances where the government is just a voluntary agency, for example HOSHANGABAD curriculum implementation in Madhya Pradesh. This partnership encouraged many other partnerships between NGOs and government.  In the recent years such partnerships have increased. But this doesn’t mean that NGOs should work along with the government projects. NGOs need to find beneficiary who are neglected by the government schemes and they should find ways to address their problems. 

Literature review:
In this section I will review two papers. First one is the research paper by Alice Jowett, Caroline Dyer [2] which talks about scaling up of the educational NGOs.  

Scaling of educational NGOs:
This paper talks about different methods of scaling up the NGOs through replication. NGOs need to scale up at some point of time to ‘achieve more’. This paper discusses the differences between scaling up and replication. Replication is one means to achieve scaling up. Selecting the pathways of scaling up is also as much as important selecting the initiative to be scaled up. For countries like India replication is more suitable to achieve scaling. It gives the NGO opportunity to work on larger sector as well it still preserves NGO’s perspective on the problem. Due to the view of the donors that initiatives must be scalable in future it is better for the NGOs to experiment the small scale model. Choosing replication as a means of scaling-up has its own specific advantages and disadvantages which depend on path they chose to replicate. The most important thing that decide the success of the replication is the appropriateness of the initiative in the particular local background. This can be a huge factor in India where there is cultural diversity. My view is that before replication in full scale in some other locality, it is better to implement similar model and understand the draw backs. 
	The paper also talks about different methods of replicating an initiative. I will be expressing my view on some specific methods. First is mandated replication, it shows both methods one in which the NGO doesn’t have any decision making position, but they can only initiate Ideas. This is like case of Hoshangabad project, which was a failure in the end. By giving the government more part in the decision making the NGO is most likely to lose its identity. The second method shows a partnership method in which both the government and NGO will have equal part in decision making. This method most likely will achieve the mutual interests. Balsakhi program is an example of such case. The next method is Franchise replication in which the NGO will keep on expanding their reach through some other NGO body while giving their continuous support. This program is like partnership of two NGOs. This program will work in the case of two NGOs having similar resources for example teacher trainers. There are advantages with this method with respect to competition for funding; other two methods are staged replication and concept replication. Staged replication may not work in Indian circumstances as we need to scale up so that the number of beneficiary should increase manifold, otherwise the program might lose its structure before reaching the larger communities. But the staged replication can be used for testing of the program in different localities. Concept replication is the most flexible type implementation where the main aspects of a successful program are replicated by the same or some other independent organization. 

Target Groups:
 In this section I will explain the problems faced by few target groups. The next section will give details about different innovative programs implemented by different NGOs to address those problems. The target groups that I will be discussing are Schools in rural area, Orphans, girls. 

Schools in rural India:
Facilities are always the major concerns in the case of rural schools. Some schools do not have proper classrooms, toilets, lab, and computer facilities. After implementation of SSA infrastructural problems were addressed. Computer and Lab facilities are not available in most of the schools.  Quality of teachers, Absenteeism of teachers and lack of motivation, critical teacher - student ratios, lack of awareness about quality education in students and parents are major factors concerning the teaching. Activities at school are major parts of child’s holistic development. Children need to participate in cultural, social and sports activities in school. Due to the lack of facilities and inability of teachers in recognizing the talents and encouraging the students, students from rural areas lack in communication skills and the talent of many students goes unrecognized. Students need to spend some time with the parents so that they can convey their problems in the school. Most of the parents in rural place are uneducated or occupied with work. Hence children will not get proper guidance in academic related problems. Another important issue is the drop out in rural places. Dropout rate of boys (32%)[1] is more than that of girls(25%)[3]. The major factor for dropout for boys are ‘students not interested’ (31%)[3], ‘financial constraints’ (12%) [3]. Poverty forces many boys to dropout from schools, so that join the workforce along with their parents.
 
Girls: 
With government programs like SSA, KGBV providing facilities to promote girl education there is decline in girl dropout rate at primary level. Girl dropouts have more reasons than just poverty. Also these programs do not address girl drop outs at higher education. So girls need more than basic education during their primary education. When we look at the reasons for girl dropout rates (rural) the major factors are ‘students not interested’ (31%),’ parents not interested’ (17.4%), ‘financial constraints’ (10.2%) [3]. Second major reason is a major concern specific to the girls. This survey shows that there are parents in rural in India who feels insecurity or uncomfortable about sending their daughters to school. The major reasons for dropping out in the case of urban girls are ‘students not interested’ (36.6%), ‘unable to cope’ (14.5%), and ‘financial constraints’ (16%)[3].  We can infer that in urban area more girls are forced to work when compared to rural area.    

Orphans:
There are 23 million orphans in the age group (0-17) in India according to the survey done by SOS-children village. Juvenile Justice (JJ-2000) act states that government is responsible for providing education, shelter, food, vocational training for these children. There are 1000 registered charity run orphanages in India and many more are registered. According to a survey [4] 80% orphanages are providing basic education for the orphans. 40% have vocational training centres and 20% have networking with placement agencies. As these children are supposed find ways to living after reaching 18 years. The quality of education provided by the orphanages is not good enough to provide them decent jobs or scholarships. Also they need some vocational training and soft skills training.   
 
 Implementing innovation & Technology based solutions
Innovation is always a great way to change things in large scale. Innovation can be introducing technology based learning, ICT (Information and communication technology), teaching kits, new methodologies etc., I will go through each of these methods implemented to address the problems discussed in the previous section. I will also express my views about scaling up the solutions.

Technology Based Innovations:
 Due to the revolutionary improvements in technology the cost of the equipment, software has come down to a level where they can be distributed in large scale. In rural places in India it is always difficult to learn about computers as many of the people cannot afford the technology. This is observed for children from slums and orphanages. There are NGOs that are working on computer aided learning, computer training, satellite classrooms, tools to aid visual or hearing impaired. Pratham[5], Byrraju foundation[6], Azim premji[7] foundation, IBM smartkidz[5] are some of the NGOs working on computer aided learning.. 

 Computer Aided Learning: 
             Computer is one of the major tools that can be used to enhance the learning methods. Simulations, videos, pictures of the subject give better understanding than reading from books. Hence computer aided learning (CAL) is a great method to implement to improve quality of education. But in India only 2.2% of public schools have Computers an average 5/10 children share a single PC Central Government budgets only Rs 950 per school to set up computers [5]. This is very ordinary job by government. In recent times the government is trying to implement ICT technology like AAKASH tablet to bring the technology to rural students. Another problem is the knowledge of the teachers in using the technology. Pratham is working on a CAL project in 7 states affecting 90,000 children where they provide computer facilities as well as training to the teachers [5]. They created software & games called JIGAR that will help children to learn math and English. They train teachers called SANCHARAKS to use this technology in schools. It will be better if the government takes up such program to train the teachers in computer basics. Byrraju foundation [6] is working in government schools to provide facilities similar to corporate model schools. They are working in 260 schools. Their program introduces 20 different types of operational interventions to provide required facilities for rural students. IBM smartkidz[6] is another program by Byrraju foundation supported by IBM. They use computers to teach to kids in pre-primary and primary to give the kids opportunity to explore their creativity. This program also trains the teachers to use the technology provided. They trained 1000 teachers in 8 states. Azim Premji Foundation [7] has also been working on computer aided learning methods in their programs. They also developed digital media resources based on curriculum for 3-8 classes in 18 languages.  Communication giant Vodafone has developed WEBBOX [8] for PRATHAM’s digital classrooms that will help low income schools in using technology. 
             Computer aided learning is a means to provide quality education in large scale. NGOs working need to find ways to train teachers in public schools or deploy trained teachers in a group of schools so that they can fill the gaps. Scaling up the resources in computer aided learning is very easy as they can replicate the digital media. From the example of WEBBOX, AAKASH it can be seen that working together with private or public organizations will make it easy for the NGOs so that they can work on allocation & deployment of these resources. It is observed in Pratham’s programs that not only students, but teachers also enjoy using these methods as this gives them advantage in explaining difficult concept through visualization. Computer also provides ways to implement project based learning, soft skills training. 

Computer skills training:
For higher classes learning computer basics is very useful. It gives them more ways to learn knowledge in further education. In the 11th 5 year plan government has indicated that vocational training as a top priority in eradicating poverty. In rural places many children start working after passing 10th class due to poverty. If they have the basic training then they can learn few more things that can help them to get a job which gives them better economic & social status. This case was observed for people working in west Asian countries where people who knew computer basics were able to find better jobs in terms of income& work. Children from orphanages need to find work after 18 years. Girls in rural in India are asked to dropout after 10th class because of the unavailability of higher classes within their reach, or they feel it is not necessary to educate girls. Advancements in ICT have led to more employee requirements or rather job opportunities. For example there is need for people to work in call centres for mobile operators. Their basic requirement is basic computer skills and good communication skills. So if girls and children from orphanages have training in basic computer skills they can find other ways to get a respectful job. Some NGOs like BHUMI, MAD, and SAKSHI are working to provide basic computer skills to orphans & girls to address this need. BHUMI and MAD [9] concentrate on providing computer skills to children from rural public schools and orphanages. They teach both basic skills (MS office, software, hardware basics) and advanced skills(C, JAVA, HTML etc.). Sakshi [10] provides vocational training along with JSS certification to poor girls & boys. But their reachability is too small. They are working in top cities like Chennai, Bangalore and 3 other cities. Their success rate is good. They need to take it to the rural India either through government partnership or through trust funding.

Teaching Kits & methodologies 
                  The ineffectiveness of the current education system can be attributed to unavailability of resources, lack of interest of teachers, teaching methods etc., when we talk about resources government is providing infrastructure and the basic needs like books. But this is not enough to reach out to all children. Children learn in different ways, some students can understand from traditional teaching but at the early stage of the learning process they may not be able to understand everything from the teacher. They need activities, illustrations, experiments to learn at faster pace. Most of the public schools and low cost private schools do not have any of these facilities. When we look from the perspective of the teachers they also feel the need for such facilities as they can make their teaching more interesting. Activity based learning (ABL) will help the children to learn the fundamentals more efficiently. Tamil Nadu government has implemented ABL in the state. But this is not the case in the country. It will take up lot of resources both financial and human. To implement ABL we need creativity, various experimented models to get the most appropriate model. Hence it is ideal for NGOs to work in this area. They can work on either small targeted groups and then they can expand through partnership or replication. Some NGOs provide teaching kits developed by them in public schools. These teaching kits can be for science experiments, language, and math.

Science & Mathematics kits
                 Agastya foundation [11] works with science experimental kits. They conduct mobile science lab sessions, science fairs, and teacher development program. They also have science centres where schools can visit. They observed that students at younger age can perceive through the experiments rather than reading from books. They also provide a teaching kit called LAB in a BOX which is teacher focused program. In this program the teachers are given initial training on the KIT and the kit can modified according to the teaching style. This will give the teachers flexibility in their teaching as well as to think creatively in their teaching. This model is found to be very successful rural parts of KARNATAKA. Currently they have about 50 mobile science labs. This model can be replicated very easily through mass production. BHUMI provides orphanages, rural public schools science and maths learning kits for primary students which will help the students to explore their interests. Byrraju foundation provides such demo kits for science in their model schools. In these three models only Byrraju foundation’s model is implemented in large scale. BHUMI and Agastya are working independently and their intervention is not permanent, whereas Byrraju foundation works in private public partnership. So these two organizations can form partnership or scale their model to extend it to a larger target group. 
 
English training Kits:
               Students in rural public schools face problems in learning English also. Pratham’s program read India implements a new teaching methodology for English and other languages called CAML (Combined activities for maximized learning)[12]. This method uses reading, learning, speaking, writing in a variety of ways to accelerate the learning. This program works on blocks of villages of size 100. Currently this program is active in 19 states India. For using their methods they train the school teachers, anganwadi workers trained by Pratham teams. This program shows innovation not only in teaching methodology, but also in implementation of the method. Byrraju foundation spoken English program is another program which worked for large scale implementation.  BHUMI& MAD combined project Make a Difference is an English training& soft skills training program targeting orphans, children from rural places. They provide training through volunteers who are guided by CELTA accredited trainers. 

Innovation in implementation of Ideas:
              The NGOs can show innovation in showing their ideologies too. Examples are Teach for India [13] and AID India. The main objective of Teach for India is to make the people aware of what is quality education. The way they are conveying that is by giving the people some taste of quality education for a small amount of time, so that the children and parents can question the methods taught by other teachers. If they had implemented this in one place then it wouldn’t have much of notice. 
               AID India’s Eureka Kidz program [14] is another notable innovation which is giving employment as well as required guidance for students in rural India. They prepare required material for the students to understand difficult concepts. They also train the local youth who have education up to 12th class to tutor the children. Advantage of employing them is that the children are well acquainted with those people. Scaling up this method does not require much of financial resource. Hence this method is very suitable for providing guidance for children in rural India.   

Teacher Training:  
              It is important to use different methods in training the teachers. Most of the teachers in public schools are well educated. Some may not agree to undergo training under some NGO. Also it is difficult to change their method of teaching in few days. There are NGOs working on teacher training methods like smile foundation, Byrraju foundation, APF, Asha for education. Pratham conducts a different program to train teachers in using their software and tools. Agastya has invented a new tool called Lab in a Box to assist the teachers in explaining science and maths which is flexible to the teacher’s teaching methodology. These two examples are ways in which teachers can be trained with innovative teaching kits. APF [7] has largest teacher training method working through district level institutes. They conduct the research on teacher training and work on capacity building based on the results of the research. This is an example of teacher training which involves thorough research rather than empirical trials.   
 Girl dropouts:
Many government organized programs and NGO run campaigns are trying to re-enrolment of the dropped out girls. Some NGOs like Smile foundation, Rasta are trying to track down the girl dropouts. But the girls who joined school after spending time away from schools find it difficult to cope up with education. To address problems Pratham, Sakshi have introduced non formal education to the drop outs so that they can get used to schooling.     
          There are trusts like Bill& Milinda-Gates foundation, Ratan Tata trust that are encouraging innovation in non-profit sector. International development enterprise a part of Bill & Milinda Gates foundation is working on a project named Human centred design (HCD) tool kit that will provide tools for the need of the NGOs. Innovations can be scaled up through CSRs of big corporate organizations.
Conclusions  
·	Government should be open minded to innovative solutions. When scaling up with governments in India, it is better to maintain a governing body of the original NGO as changes in government may eradicate the whole program.
·	NGOs which have technology based solution should always work on models that are scalable either through partnership or replication
·	NGOs with successful programs and which are not having enough resources should work with other NGOs to scale up their models. 
 References:
[1] http://ssa.nic.in/news/girls-education-in-india-achievements-since-independence-press-release-wednesday-january-23-2008
[2] Scaling-up successfully: Pathways to replication for educational NGOs
Alice Jowett, Caroline Dyer – International journal of educational development 32(2012)
[3] USHA JAYACHANDRAN- economic & political weekly march 2007:
[4] DATA BASE OF CHILD CARE INSTITUTIONSREGISTERED UNDER JUVENILE JUSTICE (CARE AND PROTECTION OF CHILDREN) ACT 2000 (AS AMENDED IN 2006)
[5] http://www.pratham.org/M-23-3-Computer-Aided-Learning.aspx
[6] http://www.byrrajufoundation.org/html/deliverymodulae.php?cat=d11
[7] http://azimpremjifoundation.org/Our_Work
[8] http://www.pratham.org/M-76-3-Digital-Classrooms.aspx
[9] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/BHUMI_%28organization%29
[10] http://www.sakshingo.org/projects/vocational-training.html
[11] http://www.agastya.org/
[12] http://www.pratham.org/M-18-3-Read-India.aspx
[13] http://www.teachforindia.org/
[14] http://www.eurekachild.org/


Introduction
The topic of this paper is Innovative methods by NGOs and scaling. This paper analyses some of the methods followed by NGOs to address issues that the government failing to address. Some of these methods are small scale models; this paper tries to explain difficulties in scaling theshods are small scale models; this paper tries to explain difficulties in scaling thes
